One dollar and eighty-seven cents. That was all. And sixty cents of it was
in pennies. Pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the grocer and
the vegetable man and the butcher until one’s cheeks burned with the silent
imputation of parsimony that such close dealing implied. Three times Della
counted it. One dollar and eighty-seven cents. And the next day would be
Christmas.
There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little couch
and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection that life is
made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.
While the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first stage
to the second, take a look at the home. A furnished flat at $8 per week. It did
not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had that word on the lookout for
the mendicancy squad.
In the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go, and
an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring. Also
appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name “Mr. James Dillingham
Young.”
The “Dillingham” had been flung to the breeze during a former period of
prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. Now, when the
income was shrunk to $20, though, they were thinking seriously of contracting
to a modest and unassuming D. But whenever Mr. James Dillingham Young
came home and reached his flat above he was called “Jim” and greatly hugged
by Mrs. James Dillingham Young, already introduced to you as Della. Which
is all very good.
Della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag. She
stood by the window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a gray fence in
a gray backyard. Tomorrow would be Christmas Day, and she had only $1.87
with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving every penny she could
for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a week doesn’t go far. Expenses
had been greater than she had calculated. They always are. Only $1.87 to buy
a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a happy hour she had spent planning for
something nice for him. Something fine and rare and sterling—something just
a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.
There was a pier glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you
have seen a pier glass in an $8 flat. A very thin and very agile person may, by
observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal strips, obtain a
fairly accurate conception of his looks. Della, being slender, had mastered the
art.
Suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. Her
eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within twenty
seconds. Rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its full length.
Now, there were two possessions of the James Dillingham Youngs in
which they both took a mighty pride. One was Jim’s gold watch that had been
his father’s and his grandfather’s. The other was Della’s hair. Had the queen of
Sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, Della would have let her hair hang
out the window some day to dry just to depreciate Her Majesty’s jewels and
gifts. Had King Solomon been the janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the
basement, Jim would have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to
see him pluck at his beard from envy.
So now Della’s beautiful hair fell about her rippling and shining like a
cascade of brown waters. It reached below her knee and made itself almost a
garment for her. And then she did it up again nervously and quickly. Once she
faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or two splashed on the worn
red carpet.
On went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. With a whirl of
skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she fluttered out the door
and down the stairs to the street.
Where she stopped the sign read: “Mme. Sofronie. Hair Goods of All
Kinds.” One flight up Della ran, and collected herself, panting. Madame, large,
too white, chilly, hardly looked the “Sofronie.”
“Will you buy my hair?” asked Della.
“I buy hair,” said Madame. “Take yer hat off and let’s have a sight at the
looks of it.”
Down rippled the brown cascade.
“Twenty dollars,” said Madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand.
“Give it to me quick,” said Della.
Oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. Forget the hashed
metaphor. She was ransacking the stores for Jim’s present.
She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no one else. There
was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all of them inside
out. It was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly
proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious
ornamentation—as all good things should do. It was even worthy of The
Watch. As soon as she saw it she knew that it must be Jim’s. It was like him.
Quietness and value—the description applied to both. Twenty-one dollars they
took from her for it, and she hurried home with the 87 cents. With that chain
on his watch Jim might be properly anxious about the time in any company.
Grand as the watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the
old leather strap that he used in place of a chain.
When Della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence
and reason. She got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went to work
repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which is always a
tremendous task, dear friends—a mammoth task.
Within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, close-lying curls that
made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. She looked at her
reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically.
“If Jim doesn’t kill me,” she said to herself, “before he takes a second look
at me, he’ll say I look like a Coney Island chorus girl. But what could I do—
oh! what could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents?”
At 7 o’clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of
the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.
Jim was never late. Della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on the
corner of the table near the door that he always entered. Then she heard his
step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she turned white for just a
moment. She had a habit of saying a little silent prayer about the simplest
everyday things, and now she whispered: “Please God, make him think I am
still pretty.”
The door opened and Jim stepped in and closed it. He looked thin and very
serious. Poor fellow, he was only twenty-two—and to be burdened with a
family! He needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.
Jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of quail.
His eyes were fixed upon Della, and there was an expression in them that she
could not read, and it terrified her. It was not anger, nor surprise, nor
disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments that she had been prepared
for. He simply stared at her fixedly with that peculiar expression on his face.
Della wriggled off the table and went for him.
“Jim, darling,” she cried, “don’t look at me that way. I had my hair cut off
and sold because I couldn’t have lived through Christmas without giving you a
present. It’ll grow out again—you won’t mind, will you? I just had to do it.
My hair grows awfully fast. Say ‘Merry Christmas!’ Jim, and let’s be happy.
You don’t know what a nice—what a beautiful, nice gift I’ve got for you.”
“You’ve cut off your hair?” asked Jim, laboriously, as if he had not arrived
at that patent fact yet even after the hardest mental labor.
“Cut it off and sold it,” said Della. “Don’t you like me just as well,
anyhow? I’m me without my hair, ain’t I?”
Jim looked about the room curiously.
“You say your hair is gone?” he said, with an air almost of idiocy.
“You needn’t look for it,” said Della. “It’s sold, I tell you—sold and gone,
too. It’s Christmas Eve, boy. Be good to me, for it went for you. Maybe the
hairs of my head were numbered,” she went on with sudden serious sweetness,
“but nobody could ever count my love for you. Shall I put the chops on, Jim?”
Out of his trance Jim seemed quickly to wake. He enfolded his Della. For
ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in
the other direction. Eight dollars a week or a million a year—what is the
difference? A mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. The
magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. This dark assertion
will be illuminated later on.
Jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the table.
“Don’t make any mistake, Dell,” he said, “about me. I don’t think there’s
anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could make me
like my girl any less. But if you’ll unwrap that package you may see why you
had me going a while at first.”
White fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. And then an ecstatic
scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and
wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers
of the lord of the flat.
For there lay The Combs—the set of combs, side and back, that Della had
worshipped long in a Broadway window. Beautiful combs, pure tortoise shell,
with jewelled rims—just the shade to wear in the beautiful vanished hair. They
were expensive combs, she knew, and her heart had simply craved and
yearned over them without the least hope of possession. And now, they were
hers, but the tresses that should have adorned the coveted adornments were
gone.
But she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up
with dim eyes and a smile and say: “My hair grows so fast, Jim!”
And then Della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, “Oh, oh!”
Jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. She held it out to him eagerly
upon her open palm. The dull precious metal seemed to flash with a reflection
of her bright and ardent spirit.
“Isn’t it a dandy, Jim? I hunted all over town to find it. You’ll have to look
at the time a hundred times a day now. Give me your watch. I want to see how
it looks on it.”
Instead of obeying, Jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hands
under the back of his head and smiled.
“Dell,” said he, “let’s put our Christmas presents away and keep ’em a
while. They’re too nice to use just at present. I sold the watch to get the money
to buy your combs. And now suppose you put the chops on.”
The magi, as you know, were wise men—wonderfully wise men—who
brought gifts to the Babe in the manger. They invented the art of giving
Christmas presents. Being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones, possibly
bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. And here I have
lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat
who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their
house. But in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who
give gifts these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as
they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.
Tom Squires came into the drug store to buy a toothbrush, a can of talcum,
a gargle, Castile soap, Epsom salts and a box of cigars. Having lived alone for
many years, he was methodical, and while waiting to be served he held the list
in his hand. It was Christmas week and Minneapolis was under two feet of
exhilarating, constantly refreshed snow; with his cane Tom knocked two clean
crusts of it from his overshoes. Then, looking up, he saw the blonde girl.
She was a rare blonde, even in that Promised Land of Scandinavians,
where pretty blondes are not rare. There was warm color in her cheeks, lips
and pink little hands that folded powders into papers; her hair, in long braids
twisted about her head, was shining and alive. She seemed to Tom suddenly
the cleanest person he knew of, and he caught his breath as he stepped forward
and looked into her gray eyes.
"A can of talcum."
"What kind?"
"Any kind… . That's fine."
She looked back at him apparently without self-consciousness, and, as the
list melted away, his heart raced with it wildly.
"I am not old," he wanted to say. "At fifty I'm younger than most men of
forty. Don't I interest you at all?"
But she only said "What kind of gargle?"
And he answered, "What can you recommend? … That's fine."
Almost painfully he took his eyes from her, went out and got into his
coupé.
"If that young idiot only knew what an old imbecile like me could do for
her," he thought humorously—"what worlds I could open out to her!"
As he drove away into the winter twilight he followed this train of thought
to a totally unprecedented conclusion. Perhaps the time of day was the
responsible stimulant, for the shop windows glowing into the cold, the tinkling
bells of a delivery sleigh, the white gloss left by shovels on the sidewalks, the
enormous distance of the stars, brought back the feel of other nights thirty
years ago. For an instant the girls he had known then slipped like phantoms
out of their dull matronly selves of today and fluttered past him with frosty,
seductive laughter, until a pleasant shiver crawled up his spine.
"Youth! Youth! Youth!" he apostrophized with conscious lack of
originality, and, as a somewhat ruthless and domineering man of no morals
whatsoever, he considered going back to the drug store to seek the blonde
girl's address. It was not his sort of thing, so the half-formed intention passed;
the idea remained.
"Youth, by heaven—youth!" he repeated under his breath. "I want it near
me, all around me, just once more before I'm too old to care."
He was tall, lean and handsome, with the ruddy, bronzed face of a
sportsman and a just faintly graying mustache. Once he had been among the
city's best beaus, organizer of cotillions and charity balls, popular with men
and women, and with several generations of them. After the war he had
suddenly felt poor, gone into business, and in ten years accumulated nearly a
million dollars. Tom Squires was not introspective, but he perceived now that
the wheel of his life had revolved again, bringing up forgotten, yet familiar,
dreams and yearnings. Entering his house, he turned suddenly to a pile of
disregarded invitations to see whether or not he had been bidden to a dance
tonight.
Throughout his dinner, which he ate alone at the Downtown Club, his eyes
were half closed and on his face was a faint smile. He was practicing so that
he would be able to laugh at himself painlessly, if necessary.
"I don't even know what they talk about," he admitted. "They pet—
prominent broker goes to petting party with débutante. What is a petting
party? Do they serve refreshments? Will I have to learn to play a saxophone?"
These matters, lately as remote as China in a news reel, came alive to him.
They were serious questions. At ten o'clock he walked up the steps of the
College Club to a private dance with the same sense of entering a new world
as when he had gone into a training camp back in '17. He spoke to a hostess of
his generation and to her daughter, overwhelmingly of another, and sat down
in a corner to acclimate himself.
He was not alone long. A silly young man named Leland Jaques, who lived
across the street from Tom, remarked him kindly and came over to brighten
his life. He was such an exceedingly fatuous young man that, for a moment,
Tom was annoyed, but he perceived craftily that he might be of service.
"Hello, Mr. Squires. How are you, sir?"
"Fine, thanks, Leland. Quite a dance."
As one man of the world with another, Mr. Jaques sat, or lay, down on the
couch and lit—or so it seemed to Tom—three or four cigarettes at once.
"You should of been here last night, Mr. Squires. Oh, boy, that was a party
and a half! The Caulkins. Hap-past five!"
"Who's that girl who changes partners every minute?" Tom asked… . "No,
the one in white passing the door."
"That's Annie Lorry."
"Arthur Lorry's daughter?"
"Yes."
"She seems popular."
"About the most popular girl in town—anyway, at a dance."
"Not popular except at dances?"
"Oh, sure, but she hangs around with Randy Cambell all the time."
"What Cambell?"
"D. B."
There were new names in town in the last decade.
"It's a boy-and-girl affair." Pleased with this phrase, Jaques tried to repeat
it: "One of those boy-and-girls affair—boys-and-girl affairs—" He gave it up
and lit several more cigarettes, crushing out the first series on Tom's lap.
"Does she drink?"
"Not especially. At least I never saw her passed out… . That's Randy
Cambell just cut in on her now."
They were a nice couple. Her beauty sparkled bright against his strong, tall
form, and they floated hoveringly, delicately, like two people in a nice,
amusing dream. They came near and Tom admired the faint dust of powder
over her freshness, the guarded sweetness of her smile, the fragility of her
body calculated by Nature to a millimeter to suggest a bud, yet guarantee a
flower. Her innocent, passionate eyes were brown, perhaps; but almost violet
in the silver light.
"Is she out this year?"
"Who?"
"Miss Lorry."
"Yes."
Although the girl's loveliness interested Tom, he was unable to picture
himself as one of the attentive, grateful queue that pursued her around the
room. Better meet her when the holidays were over and most of these young
men were back in college "where they belonged." Tom Squires was old
enough to wait.
He waited a fortnight while the city sank into the endless northern
midwinter, where gray skies were friendlier than metallic blue skies, and dusk,
whose lights were a reassuring glimpse into the continuity of human cheer,
was warmer than the afternoons of bloodless sunshine. The coat of snow lost
its press and became soiled and shabby, and ruts froze in the street; some of
the big houses on Crest Avenue began to close as their occupants went South.
In those cold days Tom asked Annie and her parents to go as his guests to the
last Bachelors' Ball.
The Lorrys were an old family in Minneapolis, grown a little harassed and
poor since the war. Mrs. Lorry, a contemporary of Tom's, was not surprised
that he should send mother and daughter orchids and dine them luxuriously in
his apartment on fresh caviar, quail and champagne. Annie saw him only
dimly—he lacked vividness, as the old do for the young—but she perceived
his interest in her and performed for him the traditional ritual of young beauty
—smiles, polite, wide-eyed attention, a profile held obligingly in this light or
in that. At the ball he danced with her twice, and, though she was teased about
it, she was flattered that such a man of the world—he had become that instead
of a mere old man—had singled her out. She accepted his invitation to the
symphony the following week, with the idea that it would be uncouth to
refuse.
There were several "nice invitations" like that. Sitting beside him, she
dozed in the warm shadow of Brahms and thought of Randy Cambell and
other romantic nebulosities who might appear tomorrow. Feeling casually
mellow one afternoon, she deliberately provoked Tom to kiss her on the way
home, but she wanted to laugh when he took her hands and told her fervently
he was falling in love.
"But how could you?" she protested. "Really, you musn't say such crazy
things. I won't go out with you any more, and then you'll be sorry."
A few days later her mother spoke to her as Tom waited outside in his car:
"Who's that, Annie?"
"Mr. Squires."
"Shut the door a minute. You're seeing him quite a bit."
"Why not?"
"Well, dear, he's fifty years old."
"But, mother, there's hardly anybody else in town."
"But you musn't get any silly ideas about him."
"Don't worry. Actually, he bores me to extinction most of the time." She
came to a sudden decision: "I'm not going to see him any more. I just couldn't
get out of going with him this afternoon."
And that night, as she stood by her door in the circle of Randy Cambell's
arm, Tom and his single kiss had no existence for her.
"Oh, I do love you so," Randy whispered. "Kiss me once more."
Their cool cheeks and warm lips met in the crisp darkness, and, watching
the icy moon over his shoulder, Annie knew that she was his surely and,
pulling his face down, kissed him again, trembling with emotion.
"When'll you marry me then?" he whispered.
"When can you—we afford it?"
"Couldn't you announce our engagement? If you knew the misery of
having you out with somebody else and then making love to you."
"Oh, Randy, you ask so much."
"It's so awful to say good night. Can't I come in for a minute?"
"Yes."
Sitting close together in a trance before the flickering, lessening fire, they
were oblivious that their common fate was being coolly weighed by a man of
fifty who lay in a hot bath some blocks away.
Tom Squires had guessed from Annie's extremely kind and detached
manner of the afternoon that he had failed to interest her. He had promised
himself that in such an eventuality he would drop the matter, but now he found
himself in no such humor. He did not want to marry her; he simply wanted to
see her and be with her a little; and up to the moment of her sweetly casual,
half passionate, yet wholly unemotional kiss, giving her up would have been
easy, for he was past the romantic age; but since that kiss the thought of her
made his heart move up a few inches in his chest and beat there steady and
fast.
"But this is the time to get out," he said to himself. "My age; no possible
right to force myself into her life."
He rubbed himself dry, brushed his hair before the mirror, and, as he laid
down the comb, said decisively: "That is that." And after reading for an hour
he turned out the lamp with a snap and repeated aloud: "That is that."
In other words, that was not that at all, and the click of material things did
not finish off Annie Lorry as a business decision might be settled by the tap of
a pencil on the table.
"I'm going to carry this matter a little further," he said to himself about
half-past four; on that acknowledgment he turned over and found sleep.
In the morning she had receded somewhat, but by four o'clock in the
afternoon she was all around him—the phone was for calling her, a woman's
footfalls passing his office were her footfalls, the snow outside the window
was blowing, perhaps, against her rosy face.
"There is always the little plan I thought of last night," he said to himself.
"In ten years I'll be sixty, and then no youth, no beauty for me ever any more."
In a sort of panic he took a sheet of note paper and composed a carefully
phrased letter to Annie's mother, asking permission to pay court to her
daughter. He took it himself into the hall, but before the letter slide he tore it
up and dropped the pieces in a cuspidor.
"I couldn't do such an underhand trick," he told himself, "at my age." But
this self-congratulation was premature, for he rewrote the letter and mailed it
before he left his office that night.
Next day the reply he had counted on arrived—he could have guessed its
very words in advance. It was a curt and indignant refusal.
It ended:
I think it best that you and my daughter meet no more.
Very Sincerely Yours,
MABEL TOLLMAN LORRY.
"And now," Tom thought coolly, "we'll see what the girl says to that." He
wrote a note to Annie. Her mother's letter had surprised him, it said, but
perhaps it was best that they should meet no more, in view of her mother's
attitude.
By return post came Annie's defiant answer to her mother's fiat: "This isn't
the Dark Ages. I'll see you whenever I like." She named a rendezvous for the
following afternoon. Her mother's short-sightedness brought about what he
had failed to achieve directly; for where Annie had been on the point of
dropping him, she was now determined to do nothing of the sort. And the
secrecy engendered by disapproval at home simply contributed the missing
excitement. As February hardened into deep, solemn, interminable winter, she
met him frequently and on a new basis. Sometimes they drove over to St. Paul
to see a picture or to have dinner; sometimes they parked far out on a
boulevard in his coupé, while the bitter sleet glazed the windshield to opacity
and furred his lamps with ermine. Often he brought along something special to
drink—enough to make her gay, but, carefully, never more; for mingled with
his other emotions about her was something paternally concerned.
Laying his cards on the table, he told her that it was her mother who had
unwittingly pushed her toward him, but Annie only laughed at his duplicity.
She was having a better time with him than with anyone else she had ever
known. In place of the selfish exigency of a younger man, he showed her a
never-failing consideration. What if his eyes were tired, his cheeks a little
leathery and veined, if his will was masculine and strong. Moreover, his
experience was a window looking out upon a wider, richer world; and with
Randy Cambell next day she would feel less taken care of, less valued, less
rare.
It was Tom now who was vaguely discontented. He had what he wanted—
her youth at his side—and he felt that anything further would be a mistake.
His liberty was precious to him and he could offer her only a dozen years
before he would be old, but she had become something precious to him and he
perceived that drifting wasn't fair. Then one day late in February the matter
was decided out of hand.
They had ridden home from St. Paul and dropped into the College Club for
tea, breaking together through the drifts that masked the walk and rimmed the
door. It was a revolving door; a young man came around in it, and stepping
into his space, they smelt onions and whisky. The door revolved again after
them, and he was back within, facing them. It was Randy Cambell; his face
was flushed, his eyes dull and hard.
"Hello, beautiful," he said, approaching Annie.
"Don't come so close," she protested lightly. "You smell of onions."
"You're particular all of a sudden."
"Always. I'm always particular." Annie made a slight movement back
toward Tom.
"Not always," said Randy unpleasantly. Then, with increased emphasis and
a fractional glance at Tom: "Not always." With his remark he seemed to join
the hostile world outside. "And I'll just give you a tip," he continued: "Your
mother's inside."
The jealous ill-temper of another generation reached Tom only faintly, like
the protest of a child, but at this impertinent warning he bristled with
annoyance.
"Come on, Annie," he said brusquely. "We'll go in."
With her glance uneasily averted from Randy, Annie followed Tom into
the big room.
It was sparsely populated; three middle-aged women sat near the fire.
Momentarily Annie drew back, then she walked toward them.
"Hello, mother … Mrs. Trumble … Aunt Caroline."
The two latter responded; Mrs. Trumble even nodded faintly at Tom. But
Annie's mother got to her feet without a word, her eyes frozen, her mouth
drawn. For a moment she stood staring at her daughter; then she turned
abruptly and left the room.
Tom and Annie found a table across the room.
"Wasn't she terrible?" said Annie, breathing aloud. He didn't answer.
"For three days she hasn't spoken to me." Suddenly she broke out: "Oh,
people can be so small! I was going to sing the leading part in the Junior
League show, and yesterday Cousin Mary Betts, the president, came to me and
said I couldn't."
"Why not?"
"Because a representative Junior League girl mustn't defy her mother. As if
I were a naughty child!"
Tom stared on at a row of cups on the mantelpiece—two or three of them
bore his name. "Perhaps she was right," he said suddenly. "When I begin to do
harm to you it's time to stop."
"What do you mean?"
At her shocked voice his heart poured a warm liquid forth into his body,
but he answered quietly: "You remember I told you I was going South? Well,
I'm going tomorrow."
There was an argument, but he had made up his mind. At the station next
evening she wept and clung to him.
"Thank you for the happiest month I've had in years," he said.
"But you'll come back, Tom."
"I'll be two months in Mexico; then I'm going East for a few weeks."
He tried to sound fortunate, but the frozen city he was leaving seemed to
be in blossom. Her frozen breath was a flower on the air, and his heart sank as
he realized that some young man was waiting outside to take her home in a car
hung with blooms.
"Good-by, Annie. Good-by, sweet!"
Two days later he spent the morning in Houston with Hal Meigs, a
classmate at Yale.
"You're in luck for such an old fella," said Meigs at luncheon, "because I'm
going to introduce you to the cutest little traveling companion you ever saw,
who's going all the way to Mexico City."
The lady in question was frankly pleased to learn at the station that she was
not returning alone. She and Tom dined together on the train and later played
rummy for an hour; but when, at ten o'clock, standing in the door of the
stateroom, she turned back to him suddenly with a certain look, frank and
unmistakable, and stood there holding that look for a long moment, Tom
Squires was suddenly in the grip of an emotion that was not the one in
question. He wanted desperately to see Annie, call her for a second on the
phone, and then fall asleep, knowing she was young and pure as a star, and
safe in bed.
"Good night," he said, trying to keep any repulsion out of his voice.
"Oh! Good night."
Arriving in El Paso next day, he drove over the border to Juarez. It was
bright and hot, and after leaving his bags at the station he went into a bar for
an iced drink; as he sipped it a girl's voice addressed him thickly from the
table behind:
"You'n American?"
He had noticed her slumped forward on her elbows as he came in; now,
turning, he faced a young girl of about seventeen, obviously drunk, yet with
gentility in her unsteady, sprawling voice. The American bartender leaned
confidentially forward.
"I don't know what to do about her," he said. "She come in about three
o'clock with two young fellows—one of them her sweetie. They had a fight
and the men went off, and this one's been here ever since."
A spasm of distaste passed over Tom—the rules of his generation were
outraged and defied. That an American girl should be drunk and deserted in a
tough foreign town—that such things happened, might happen to Annie. He
looked at his watch, hesitated.
"Has she got a bill?" he asked.
"She owes for five gins. But suppose her boy friends come back?"
"Tell them she's at the Roosevelt Hotel in El Paso."
Approaching, he put his hand on her shoulder. She looked up.
"You look like Santa Claus," she said vaguely. "You couldn't possibly be
Santa Claus, could you?"
"I'm going to take you to El Paso."
"Well," she considered, "you look perfectly safe to me."
She was so young—a drenched little rose. He could have wept for her
wretched unconsciousness of the old facts, the old penalties of life. Jousting at
nothing in an empty tilt yard with a shaking spear. The taxi moved too slowly
through the suddenly poisonous night.
Having explained things to a reluctant night clerk, he went out and found a
telegraph office.
"Have given up Mexican trip," he wired. "Leaving here tonight. Please
meet train in the St. Paul station at three o'clock and ride with me to
Minneapolis, as I can't spare you for another minute. All my love."
He could at least keep an eye on her, advise her, see what she did with her
life. That silly mother of hers!
On the train, as the baked tropical lands and green fields fell away and the
North swept near again with patches of snow, then fields of it, fierce winds in
the vestibule and bleak, hibernating farms, he paced the corridors with
intolerable restlessness. When they drew into the St. Paul station he swung
himself off like a young man and searched the platform eagerly, but his eyes
failed to find her. He had counted on those few minutes between the cities;
they had become a symbol of her fidelity to their friendship, and as the train
started again he searched it desperately from smoker to observation car. But he
could not find her, and now he knew that he was mad for her; at the thought
that she had taken his advice and plunged into affairs with other men, he grew
weak with fear.
Drawing into Minneapolis, his hands fumbled so that he must call the
porter to fasten his baggage. Then there was an interminable wait in the
corridor while the baggage was taken off and he was pressed up against a girl
in a squirrel-trimmed coat.
"Tom!"
"Well, I'll be—"
Her arms went up around his neck. "But, Tom," she cried, "I've been right
here in this car since St. Paul!"
His cane fell in the corridor, he drew her very tenderly close and their lips
met like starved hearts.
The new intimacy of their definite engagement brought Tom a feeling of
young happiness. He awoke on winter mornings with the sense of undeserved
joy hovering in the room; meeting young men, he found himself matching the
vigor of his mind and body against theirs. Suddenly his life had a purpose and
a background; he felt rounded and complete. On gray March afternoons when
she wandered familiarly in his apartment the warm sureties of his youth
flooded back—ecstasy and poignancy, the mortal and the eternal posed in their
immemorially tragic juxtaposition and, a little astounded, he found himself
relishing the very terminology of young romance. But he was more thoughtful
than a younger lover; and to Annie he seemed to "know everything," to stand
holding open the gates for her passage into the truly golden world.
"We'll go to Europe first," he said.
"Oh, we'll go there a lot, won't we? Let's spend our winters in Italy and the
spring in Paris."
"But, little Annie, there's business."
"Well, we'll stay away as much as we can anyhow. I hate Minneapolis."
"Oh, no." He was a little shocked. "Minneapolis is all right."
"When you're here it's all right."
Mrs. Lorry yielded at length to the inevitable. With ill grace she
acknowledged the engagement, asking only that the marriage should not take
place until fall.
"Such a long time," Annie sighed.
"After all, I'm your mother. It's so little to ask."
It was a long winter, even in a land of long winters. March was full of
billowy drifts, and when it seemed at last as though the cold must be defeated,
there was a series of blizzards, desperate as last stands. The people waited;
their first energy to resist was spent, and man, like weather, simply hung on.
There was less to do now and the general restlessness was expressed by
surliness in daily contacts. Then, early in April, with a long sigh the ice
cracked, the snow ran into the ground and the green, eager spring broke up
through.
One day, riding along a slushy road in a fresh, damp breeze with a little
starved, smothered grass in it, Annie began to cry. Sometimes she cried for
nothing, but this time Tom suddenly stopped the car and put his arm around
her.
"Why do you cry like that? Are you unhappy?"
"Oh, no, no!" she protested.
"But you cried yesterday the same way. And you wouldn't tell me why.
You must always tell me."
"Nothing, except the spring. It smells so good, and it always has so many
sad thoughts and memories in it."
"It's our spring, my sweetheart," he said. "Annie, don't let's wait. Let's be
married in June."
"I promised mother, but if you like we can announce our engagement in
June."
The spring came fast now. The sidewalks were damp, then dry, and the
children roller-skated on them and boys played baseball in the soft, vacant
lots. Tom got up elaborate picnics of Annie's contemporaries and encouraged
her to play golf and tennis with them. Abruptly, with a final, triumphant lurch
of Nature, it was full summer.
On a lovely May evening Tom came up the Lorrys' walk and sat down
beside Annie's mother on the porch.
"It's so pleasant," he said, "I thought Annie and I would walk instead of
driving this evening. I want to show her the funny old house I was born in."
"On Chambers Street, wasn't it? Annie'll be home in a few minutes. She
went riding with some young people after dinner."
"Yes, on Chambers Street."
He looked at his watch presently, hoping Annie would come while it was
still light enough to see. Quarter of nine. He frowned. She had kept him
waiting the night before, kept him waiting an hour yesterday afternoon.
"If I was twenty-one," he said to himself, "I'd make scenes and we'd both
be miserable."
He and Mrs. Lorry talked; the warmth of the night precipitated the vague
evening lassitude of the fifties and softened them both, and for the first time
since his attentions to Annie began, there was no unfriendliness between them.
By and by long silences fell, broken only by the scratch of a match or the
creak of her swinging settee. When Mr. Lorry came home Tom threw away his
second cigar in surprise and looked at his watch; it was after ten.
"Annie's late," Mrs. Lorry said.
"I hope there's nothing wrong," said Tom anxiously. "Who is she with?"
"There were four when they started out. Randy Cambell and another
couple—I didn't notice who. They were only going for a soda."
"I hope there hasn't been any trouble. Perhaps—Do you think I ought to go
and see?"
"Ten isn't late nowadays. You'll find—" Remembering that Tom Squires
was marrying Annie, not adopting her, she kept herself from adding: "You'll
get used to it."
Her husband excused himself and went up to bed, and the conversation
became more forced and desultory. When the church clock over the way
struck eleven they both broke off and listened to the beats. Twenty minutes
later just as Tom impatiently crushed out his last cigar, an automobile drifted
down the street and came to rest in front of the door.
For a minute no one moved on the porch or in the auto. Then Annie, with a
hat in her hand, got out and came quickly up the walk. Defying the tranquil
night, the car snorted away.
"Oh, hello!" she cried. "I'm so sorry! What time is it? Am I terribly late?"
Tom didn't answer. The street lamp threw wine color upon her face and
expressed with a shadow the heightened flush of her cheek. Her dress was
crushed, her hair was in brief, expressive disarray. But it was the strange little
break in her voice that made him afraid to speak, made him turn his eyes
aside.
"What happened?" Mrs. Lorry asked casually.
"Oh, a blow-out and something wrong with the engine—and we lost our
way. Is it terribly late?"
And then, as she stood before them, her hat still in her hand, her breast
rising and falling a little, her eyes wide and bright, Tom realized with a shock
that he and her mother were people of the same age looking at a person of
another. Try as he might, he could not separate himself from Mrs. Lorry. When
she excused herself he suppressed a frantic tendency to say, "But why should
you go now? After sitting here all evening?"
They were alone. Annie came up to him and pressed his hand. He had
never been so conscious of her beauty; her damp hands were touched with
dew.
"You were out with young Cambell," he said.
"Yes. Oh, don't be mad. I feel—I feel so upset tonight."
"Upset?"
She sat down, whimpering a little.
"I couldn't help it. Please don't be mad. He wanted so for me to take a ride
with him and it was such a wonderful night, so I went just for an hour. And we
began talking and I didn't realize the time. I felt so sorry for him."
"How do you think I felt?" He scorned himself, but it was said now.
"Don't, Tom. I told you I was terribly upset. I want to go to bed."
"I understand. Good night, Annie."
"Oh, please don't act that way, Tom. Can't you understand?"
But he could, and that was just the trouble. With the courteous bow of
another generation, he walked down the steps and off into the obliterating
moonlight. In a moment he was just a shadow passing the street lamps and
then a faint footfall up the street.
All through that summer he often walked abroad in the evenings. He liked
to stand for a minute in front of the house where he was born, and then in front
of another house where he had been a little boy. On his customary routes there
were other sharp landmarks of the 90's, converted habitats of gayeties that no
longer existed—the shell of Jansen's Livery Stables and the old Nushka Rink,
where every winter his father had curled on the well-kept ice.
"And it's a darn pity," he would mutter. "A darn pity."
He had a tendency, too, to walk past the lights of a certain drug store,
because it seemed to him that it had contained the seed of another and nearer
branch of the past. Once he went in, and inquiring casually about the blonde
clerk, found that she had married and departed several months before. He
obtained her name and on an impulse sent her a wedding present "from a
dumb admirer," for he felt he owed something to her for his happiness and
pain. He had lost the battle against youth and spring, and with his grief paid
the penalty for age's unforgivable sin—refusing to die. But he could not have
walked down wasted into the darkness without being used up a little; what he
had wanted, after all, was only to break his strong old heart. Conflict itself has
a value beyond victory and defeat, and those three months—he had them
forever.
It was a wonderful night, such a night as is only possible when we are
young, dear reader. The sky was so starry, so bright that, looking at it, one
could not help asking oneself whether ill-humoured and capricious people
could live under such a sky. That is a youthful question too, dear reader, very
youthful, but may the Lord put it more frequently into your heart!... Speaking
of capricious and ill-humoured people, I cannot help recalling my moral
condition all that day. From early morning I had been oppressed by a strange
despondency. It suddenly seemed to me that I was lonely, that every one was
forsaking me and going away from me. Of course, any one is entitled to ask
who "every one" was. For though I had been living almost eight years in
Petersburg I had hardly an acquaintance. But what did I want with
acquaintances? I was acquainted with all Petersburg as it was; that was why I
felt as though they were all deserting me when all Petersburg packed up and
went to its summer villa. I felt afraid of being left alone, and for three whole
days I wandered about the town in profound dejection, not knowing what to do
with myself. Whether I walked in the Nevsky, went to the Gardens or
sauntered on the embankment, there was not one face of those I had been
accustomed to meet at the same time and place all the year. They, of course, do
not know me, but I know them. I know them intimately, I have almost made a
study of their faces, and am delighted when they are gay, and downcast when
they are under a cloud. I have almost struck up a friendship with one old man
whom I meet every blessed day, at the same hour in Fontanka. Such a grave,
pensive countenance; he is always whispering to himself and brandishing his
left arm, while in his right hand he holds a long gnarled stick with a gold knob.
He even notices me and takes a warm interest in me. If I happen not to be at a
certain time in the same spot in Fontanka, I am certain he feels disappointed.
That is how it is that we almost bow to each other, especially when we are
both in good humour. The other day, when we had not seen each other for two
days and met on the third, we were actually touching our hats, but, realizing in
time, dropped our hands and passed each other with a look of interest.
I know the houses too. As I walk along they seem to run forward in the
streets to look out at me from every window, and almost to say: "Goodmorning!
How do you do? I am quite well, thank God, and I am to have a new
storey in May," or, "How are you? I am being redecorated to-morrow;" or, "I
was almost burnt down and had such a fright," and so on. I have my favourites
among them, some are dear friends; one of them intends to be treated by the
architect this summer. I shall go every day on purpose to see that the operation
is not a failure. God forbid! But I shall never forget an incident with a very
pretty little house of a light pink colour. It was such a charming little brick
house, it looked so hospitably at me, and so proudly at its ungainly
neighbours, that my heart rejoiced whenever I happened to pass it. Suddenly
last week I walked along the street, and when I looked at my friend I heard a
plaintive, "They are painting me yellow!" The villains! The barbarians! They
had spared nothing, neither columns, nor cornices, and my poor little friend
was as yellow as a canary. It almost made me bilious. And to this day I have
not had the courage to visit my poor disfigured friend, painted the colour of
the Celestial Empire.
So now you understand, reader, in what sense I am acquainted with all
Petersburg.
I have mentioned already that I had felt worried for three whole days
before I guessed the cause of my uneasiness. And I felt ill at ease in the street
—this one had gone and that one had gone, and what had become of the other?
—and at home I did not feel like myself either. For two evenings I was
puzzling my brains to think what was amiss in my corner; why I felt so
uncomfortable in it. And in perplexity I scanned my grimy green walls, my
ceiling covered with a spider's web, the growth of which Matrona has so
successfully encouraged. I looked over all my furniture, examined every chair,
wondering whether the trouble lay there (for if one chair is not standing in the
same position as it stood the day before, I am not myself). I looked at the
window, but it was all in vain ... I was not a bit the better for it! I even
bethought me to send for Matrona, and was giving her some fatherly
admonitions in regard to the spider's web and sluttishness in general; but she
simply stared at me in amazement and went away without saying a word, so
that the spider's web is comfortably hanging in its place to this day. I only at
last this morning realized what was wrong. Aie! Why, they are giving me the
slip and making off to their summer villas! Forgive the triviality of the
expression, but I am in no mood for fine language ... for everything that had
been in Petersburg had gone or was going away for the holidays; for every
respectable gentleman of dignified appearance who took a cab was at once
transformed, in my eyes, into a respectable head of a household who after his
daily duties were over, was making his way to the bosom of his family, to the
summer villa; for all the passers-by had now quite a peculiar air which seemed
to say to every one they met: "We are only here for the moment, gentlemen,
and in another two hours we shall be going off to the summer villa." If a
window opened after delicate fingers, white as snow, had tapped upon the
pane, and the head of a pretty girl was thrust out, calling to a street-seller with
pots of flowers—at once on the spot I fancied that those flowers were being
bought not simply in order to enjoy the flowers and the spring in stuffy town
lodgings, but because they would all be very soon moving into the country and
could take the flowers with them. What is more, I made such progress in my
new peculiar sort of investigation that I could distinguish correctly from the
mere air of each in what summer villa he was living. The inhabitants of
Kamenny and Aptekarsky Islands or of the Peterhof Road were marked by the
studied elegance of their manner, their fashionable summer suits, and the fine
carriages in which they drove to town. Visitors to Pargolovo and places further
away impressed one at first sight by their reasonable and dignified air; the
tripper to Krestovsky Island could be recognized by his look of irrepressible
gaiety. If I chanced to meet a long procession of waggoners walking lazily
with the reins in their hands beside waggons loaded with regular mountains of
furniture, tables, chairs, ottomans and sofas and domestic utensils of all sorts,
frequently with a decrepit cook sitting on the top of it all, guarding her
master's property as though it were the apple of her eye; or if I saw boats
heavily loaded with household goods crawling along the Neva or Fontanka to
the Black River or the Islands—the waggons and the boats were multiplied
tenfold, a hundredfold, in my eyes. I fancied that everything was astir and
moving, everything was going in regular caravans to the summer villas. It
seemed as though Petersburg threatened to become a wilderness, so that at last
I felt ashamed, mortified and sad that I had nowhere to go for the holidays and
no reason to go away. I was ready to go away with every waggon, to drive off
with every gentleman of respectable appearance who took a cab; but no one—
absolutely no one—invited me; it seemed they had forgotten me, as though
really I were a stranger to them!
I took long walks, succeeding, as I usually did, in quite forgetting where I
was, when I suddenly found myself at the city gates. Instantly I felt
lighthearted, and I passed the barrier and walked between cultivated fields and
meadows, unconscious of fatigue, and feeling only all over as though a burden
were falling off my soul. All the passers-by gave me such friendly looks that
they seemed almost greeting me, they all seemed so pleased at something.
They were all smoking cigars, every one of them. And I felt pleased as I never
had before. It was as though I had suddenly found myself in Italy—so strong
was the effect of nature upon a half-sick townsman like me, almost stifling
between city walls.
There is something inexpressibly touching in nature round Petersburg,
when at the approach of spring she puts forth all her might, all the powers
bestowed on her by Heaven, when she breaks into leaf, decks herself out and
spangles herself with flowers.... Somehow I cannot help being reminded of a
frail, consumptive girl, at whom one sometimes looks with compassion,
sometimes with sympathetic love, whom sometimes one simply does not
notice; though suddenly in one instant she becomes, as though by chance,
inexplicably lovely and exquisite, and, impressed and intoxicated, one cannot
help asking oneself what power made those sad, pensive eyes flash with such
fire? What summoned the blood to those pale, wan cheeks? What bathed with
passion those soft features? What set that bosom heaving? What so suddenly
called strength, life and beauty into the poor girl's face, making it gleam with
such a smile, kindle with such bright, sparkling laughter? You look round, you
seek for some one, you conjecture.... But the moment passes, and next day you
meet, maybe, the same pensive and preoccupied look as before, the same pale
face, the same meek and timid movements, and even signs of remorse, traces
of a mortal anguish and regret for the fleeting distraction.... And you grieve
that the momentary beauty has faded so soon never to return, that it flashed
upon you so treacherously, so vainly, grieve because you had not even time to
love her....
And yet my night was better than my day! This was how it happened.
I came back to the town very late, and it had struck ten as I was going
towards my lodgings. My way lay along the canal embankment, where at that
hour you never meet a soul. It is true that I live in a very remote part of the
town. I walked along singing, for when I am happy I am always humming to
myself like every happy man who has no friend or acquaintance with whom to
share his joy. Suddenly I had a most unexpected adventure.
Leaning on the canal railing stood a woman with her elbows on the rail,
she was apparently looking with great attention at the muddy water of the
canal. She was wearing a very charming yellow hat and a jaunty little black
mantle. "She's a girl, and I am sure she is dark," I thought. She did not seem to
hear my footsteps, and did not even stir when I passed by with bated breath
and loudly throbbing heart.
"Strange," I thought; "she must be deeply absorbed in something," and all
at once I stopped as though petrified. I heard a muffled sob. Yes! I was not
mistaken, the girl was crying, and a minute later I heard sob after sob. Good
Heavens! My heart sank. And timid as I was with women, yet this was such a
moment!... I turned, took a step towards her, and should certainly have
pronounced the word "Madam!" if I had not known that that exclamation has
been uttered a thousand times in every Russian society novel. It was only that
reflection stopped me. But while I was seeking for a word, the girl came to
herself, looked round, started, cast down her eyes and slipped by me along the
embankment. I at once followed her; but she, divining this, left the
embankment, crossed the road and walked along the pavement. I dared not
cross the street after her. My heart was fluttering like a captured bird. All at
once a chance came to my aid.
Along the same side of the pavement there suddenly came into sight, not
far from the girl, a gentleman in evening dress, of dignified years, though by
no means of dignified carriage; he was staggering and cautiously leaning
against the wall. The girl flew straight as an arrow, with the timid haste one
sees in all girls who do not want any one to volunteer to accompany them
home at night, and no doubt the staggering gentleman would not have pursued
her, if my good luck had not prompted him.
Suddenly, without a word to any one, the gentleman set off and flew full
speed in pursuit of my unknown lady. She was racing like the wind, but the
staggering gentleman was overtaking—overtook her. The girl uttered a shriek,
and ... I bless my luck for the excellent knotted stick, which happened on that
occasion to be in my right hand. In a flash I was on the other side of the street;
in a flash the obtrusive gentleman had taken in the position, had grasped the
irresistible argument, fallen back without a word, and only when we were very
far away protested against my action in rather vigorous language. But his
words hardly reached us.
"Give me your arm," I said to the girl. "And he won't dare to annoy us
further."
She took my arm without a word, still trembling with excitement and
terror. Oh, obtrusive gentleman! How I blessed you at that moment! I stole a
glance at her, she was very charming and dark—I had guessed right.
On her black eyelashes there still glistened a tear—from her recent terror
or her former grief—I don't know. But there was already a gleam of a smile on
her lips. She too stole a glance at me, faintly blushed and looked down.
"There, you see; why did you drive me away? If I had been here, nothing
would have happened...."
"But I did not know you; I thought that you too...."
"Why, do you know me now?"
"A little! Here, for instance, why are you trembling?"
"Oh, you are right at the first guess!" I answered, delighted that my girl
had intelligence; that is never out of place in company with beauty. "Yes, from
the first glance you have guessed the sort of man you have to do with.
Precisely; I am shy with women, I am agitated, I don't deny it, as much so as
you were a minute ago when that gentleman alarmed you. I am in some alarm
now. It's like a dream, and I never guessed even in my sleep that I should ever
talk with any woman."
"What? Really?..."
"Yes; if my arm trembles, it is because it has never been held by a pretty
little hand like yours. I am a complete stranger to women; that is, I have never
been used to them. You see, I am alone.... I don't even know how to talk to
them. Here, I don't know now whether I have not said something silly to you!
Tell me frankly; I assure you beforehand that I am not quick to take
offence?..."
"No, nothing, nothing, quite the contrary. And if you insist on my speaking
frankly, I will tell you that women like such timidity; and if you want to know
more, I like it too, and I won't drive you away till I get home."
"You will make me," I said, breathless with delight, "lose my timidity, and
then farewell to all my chances...."
"Chances! What chances—of what? That's not so nice."
"I beg your pardon, I am sorry, it was a slip of the tongue; but how can you
expect one at such a moment to have no desire...."
"To be liked, eh?"
"Well, yes; but do, for goodness' sake, be kind. Think what I am! Here, I
am twenty-six and I have never seen any one. How can I speak well, tactfully,
and to the point? It will seem better to you when I have told you everything
openly.... I don't know how to be silent when my heart is speaking. Well, never
mind.... Believe me, not one woman, never, never! No acquaintance of any
sort! And I do nothing but dream every day that at last I shall meet some one.
Oh, if only you knew how often I have been in love in that way...."
"How? With whom?..."
"Why, with no one, with an ideal, with the one I dream of in my sleep. I
make up regular romances in my dreams. Ah, you don't know me! It's true, of
course, I have met two or three women, but what sort of women were they?
They were all landladies, that.... But I shall make you laugh if I tell you that I
have several times thought of speaking, just simply speaking, to some
aristocratic lady in the street, when she is alone, I need hardly say; speaking to
her, of course, timidly, respectfully, passionately; telling her that I am
perishing in solitude, begging her not to send me away; saying that I have no
chance of making the acquaintance of any woman; impressing upon her that it
is a positive duty for a woman not to repulse so timid a prayer from such a
luckless man as me. That, in fact, all I ask is, that she should say two or three
sisterly words with sympathy, should not repulse me at first sight; should take
me on trust and listen to what I say; should laugh at me if she likes, encourage
me, say two words to me, only two words, even though we never meet again
afterwards!... But you are laughing; however, that is why I am telling you...."
"Don't be vexed; I am only laughing at your being your own enemy, and if
you had tried you would have succeeded, perhaps, even though it had been in
the street; the simpler the better.... No kind-hearted woman, unless she were
stupid or, still more, vexed about something at the moment, could bring herself
to send you away without those two words which you ask for so timidly.... But
what am I saying? Of course she would take you for a madman. I was judging
by myself; I know a good deal about other people's lives."
"Oh, thank you," I cried; "you don't know what you have done for me
now!"
"I am glad! I am glad! But tell me how did you find out that I was the sort
of woman with whom ... well, whom you think worthy ... of attention and
friendship ... in fact, not a landlady as you say? What made you decide to
come up to me?"
"What made me?... But you were alone; that gentleman was too insolent;
it's night. You must admit that it was a duty...."
"No, no; I mean before, on the other side—you know you meant to come
up to me."
"On the other side? Really I don't know how to answer; I am afraid to....
Do you know I have been happy to-day? I walked along singing; I went out
into the country; I have never had such happy moments. You ... perhaps it was
my fancy.... Forgive me for referring to it; I fancied you were crying, and I ...
could not bear to hear it ... it made my heart ache.... Oh, my goodness! Surely I
might be troubled about you? Surely there was no harm in feeling brotherly
compassion for you.... I beg your pardon, I said compassion.... Well, in short,
surely you would not be offended at my involuntary impulse to go up to
you?..."
"Stop, that's enough, don't talk of it," said the girl, looking down, and
pressing my hand. "It's my fault for having spoken of it; but I am glad I was
not mistaken in you.... But here I am home; I must go down this turning, it's
two steps from here.... Good-bye, thank you!..."
"Surely ... surely you don't mean ... that we shall never see each other
again?... Surely this is not to be the end?"
"You see," said the girl, laughing, "at first you only wanted two words, and
now.... However, I won't say anything ... perhaps we shall meet...."
"I shall come here to-morrow," I said. "Oh, forgive me, I am already
making demands...."
"Yes, you are not very patient ... you are almost insisting."
"Listen, listen!" I interrupted her. "Forgive me if I tell you something
else.... I tell you what, I can't help coming here to-morrow, I am a dreamer; I
have so little real life that I look upon such moments as this now, as so rare,
that I cannot help going over such moments again in my dreams. I shall be
dreaming of you all night, a whole week, a whole year. I shall certainly come
here to-morrow, just here to this place, just at the same hour, and I shall be
happy remembering to-day. This place is dear to me already. I have already
two or three such places in Petersburg. I once shed tears over memories ... like
you.... Who knows, perhaps you were weeping ten minutes ago over some
memory.... But, forgive me, I have forgotten myself again; perhaps you have
once been particularly happy here...."
"Very good," said the girl, "perhaps I will come here to-morrow, too, at ten
o'clock. I see that I can't forbid you.... The fact is, I have to be here; don't
imagine that I am making an appointment with you; I tell you beforehand that
I have to be here on my own account. But ... well, I tell you straight out, I
don't mind if you do come. To begin with, something unpleasant might happen
as it did to-day, but never mind that.... In short, I should simply like to see you
... to say two words to you. Only, mind, you must not think the worse of me
now! Don't think I make appointments so lightly.... I shouldn't make it except
that.... But let that be my secret! Only a compact beforehand...."
"A compact! Speak, tell me, tell me all beforehand; I agree to anything, I
am ready for anything," I cried delighted. "I answer for myself, I will be
obedient, respectful ... you know me...."
"It's just because I do know you that I ask you to come to-morrow," said
the girl, laughing. "I know you perfectly. But mind you will come on the
condition, in the first place (only be good, do what I ask—you see, I speak
frankly), you won't fall in love with me.... That's impossible, I assure you. I am
ready for friendship; here's my hand.... But you mustn't fall in love with me, I
beg you!"
"I swear," I cried, gripping her hand....
"Hush, don't swear, I know you are ready to flare up like gunpowder. Don't
think ill of me for saying so. If only you knew.... I, too, have no one to whom I
can say a word, whose advice I can ask. Of course, one does not look for an
adviser in the street; but you are an exception. I know you as though we had
been friends for twenty years.... You won't deceive me, will you?..."
"You will see ... the only thing is, I don't know how I am going to survive
the next twenty-four hours."
"Sleep soundly. Good-night, and remember that I have trusted you already.
But you exclaimed so nicely just now, 'Surely one can't be held responsible for
every feeling, even for brotherly sympathy!' Do you know, that was so nicely
said, that the idea struck me at once, that I might confide in you?"
"For God's sake do; but about what? What is it?"
"Wait till to-morrow. Meanwhile, let that be a secret. So much the better
for you; it will give it a faint flavour of romance. Perhaps I will tell you tomorrow,
and perhaps not.... I will talk to you a little more beforehand; we will
get to know each other better...."
"Oh yes, I will tell you all about myself to-morrow! But what has
happened? It is as though a miracle had befallen me.... My God, where am I?
Come, tell me aren't you glad that you were not angry and did not drive me
away at the first moment, as any other woman would have done? In two
minutes you have made me happy for ever. Yes, happy; who knows, perhaps,
you have reconciled me with myself, solved my doubts!... Perhaps such
moments come upon me.... But there I will tell you all about it to-morrow, you
shall know everything, everything...."
"Very well, I consent; you shall begin...."
"Agreed."
"Good-bye till to-morrow!"
"Till to-morrow!"
And we parted. I walked about all night; I could not make up my mind to
go home. I was so happy.... To-morrow!