One dollar and eighty-seven cents. That was all. And sixty cents of it was
in pennies. Pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the grocer and
the vegetable man and the butcher until one’s cheeks burned with the silent
imputation of parsimony that such close dealing implied. Three times Della
counted it. One dollar and eighty-seven cents. And the next day would be
Christmas.
There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little couch
and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection that life is
made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.
While the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first stage
to the second, take a look at the home. A furnished flat at $8 per week. It did
not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had that word on the lookout for
the mendicancy squad.
In the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go, and
an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring. Also
appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name “Mr. James Dillingham
Young.”
The “Dillingham” had been flung to the breeze during a former period of
prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. Now, when the
income was shrunk to $20, though, they were thinking seriously of contracting
to a modest and unassuming D. But whenever Mr. James Dillingham Young
came home and reached his flat above he was called “Jim” and greatly hugged
by Mrs. James Dillingham Young, already introduced to you as Della. Which
is all very good.
Della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag. She
stood by the window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a gray fence in
a gray backyard. Tomorrow would be Christmas Day, and she had only $1.87
with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving every penny she could
for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a week doesn’t go far. Expenses
had been greater than she had calculated. They always are. Only $1.87 to buy
a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a happy hour she had spent planning for
something nice for him. Something fine and rare and sterling—something just
a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.
There was a pier glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you
have seen a pier glass in an $8 flat. A very thin and very agile person may, by
observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal strips, obtain a
fairly accurate conception of his looks. Della, being slender, had mastered the
art.
Suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. Her
eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within twenty
seconds. Rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its full length.
Now, there were two possessions of the James Dillingham Youngs in
which they both took a mighty pride. One was Jim’s gold watch that had been
his father’s and his grandfather’s. The other was Della’s hair. Had the queen of
Sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, Della would have let her hair hang
out the window some day to dry just to depreciate Her Majesty’s jewels and
gifts. Had King Solomon been the janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the
basement, Jim would have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to
see him pluck at his beard from envy.
So now Della’s beautiful hair fell about her rippling and shining like a
cascade of brown waters. It reached below her knee and made itself almost a
garment for her. And then she did it up again nervously and quickly. Once she
faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or two splashed on the worn
red carpet.
On went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. With a whirl of
skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she fluttered out the door
and down the stairs to the street.
Where she stopped the sign read: “Mme. Sofronie. Hair Goods of All
Kinds.” One flight up Della ran, and collected herself, panting. Madame, large,
too white, chilly, hardly looked the “Sofronie.”
“Will you buy my hair?” asked Della.
“I buy hair,” said Madame. “Take yer hat off and let’s have a sight at the
looks of it.”
Down rippled the brown cascade.
“Twenty dollars,” said Madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand.
“Give it to me quick,” said Della.
Oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. Forget the hashed
metaphor. She was ransacking the stores for Jim’s present.
She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no one else. There
was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all of them inside
out. It was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly
proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious
ornamentation—as all good things should do. It was even worthy of The
Watch. As soon as she saw it she knew that it must be Jim’s. It was like him.
Quietness and value—the description applied to both. Twenty-one dollars they
took from her for it, and she hurried home with the 87 cents. With that chain
on his watch Jim might be properly anxious about the time in any company.
Grand as the watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the
old leather strap that he used in place of a chain.
When Della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence
and reason. She got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went to work
repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which is always a
tremendous task, dear friends—a mammoth task.
Within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, close-lying curls that
made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. She looked at her
reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically.
“If Jim doesn’t kill me,” she said to herself, “before he takes a second look
at me, he’ll say I look like a Coney Island chorus girl. But what could I do—
oh! what could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents?”
At 7 o’clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of
the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.
Jim was never late. Della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on the
corner of the table near the door that he always entered. Then she heard his
step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she turned white for just a
moment. She had a habit of saying a little silent prayer about the simplest
everyday things, and now she whispered: “Please God, make him think I am
still pretty.”
The door opened and Jim stepped in and closed it. He looked thin and very
serious. Poor fellow, he was only twenty-two—and to be burdened with a
family! He needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.
Jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of quail.
His eyes were fixed upon Della, and there was an expression in them that she
could not read, and it terrified her. It was not anger, nor surprise, nor
disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments that she had been prepared
for. He simply stared at her fixedly with that peculiar expression on his face.
Della wriggled off the table and went for him.
“Jim, darling,” she cried, “don’t look at me that way. I had my hair cut off
and sold because I couldn’t have lived through Christmas without giving you a
present. It’ll grow out again—you won’t mind, will you? I just had to do it.
My hair grows awfully fast. Say ‘Merry Christmas!’ Jim, and let’s be happy.
You don’t know what a nice—what a beautiful, nice gift I’ve got for you.”
“You’ve cut off your hair?” asked Jim, laboriously, as if he had not arrived
at that patent fact yet even after the hardest mental labor.
“Cut it off and sold it,” said Della. “Don’t you like me just as well,
anyhow? I’m me without my hair, ain’t I?”
Jim looked about the room curiously.
“You say your hair is gone?” he said, with an air almost of idiocy.
“You needn’t look for it,” said Della. “It’s sold, I tell you—sold and gone,
too. It’s Christmas Eve, boy. Be good to me, for it went for you. Maybe the
hairs of my head were numbered,” she went on with sudden serious sweetness,
“but nobody could ever count my love for you. Shall I put the chops on, Jim?”
Out of his trance Jim seemed quickly to wake. He enfolded his Della. For
ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in
the other direction. Eight dollars a week or a million a year—what is the
difference? A mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. The
magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. This dark assertion
will be illuminated later on.
Jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the table.
“Don’t make any mistake, Dell,” he said, “about me. I don’t think there’s
anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could make me
like my girl any less. But if you’ll unwrap that package you may see why you
had me going a while at first.”
White fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. And then an ecstatic
scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and
wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers
of the lord of the flat.
For there lay The Combs—the set of combs, side and back, that Della had
worshipped long in a Broadway window. Beautiful combs, pure tortoise shell,
with jewelled rims—just the shade to wear in the beautiful vanished hair. They
were expensive combs, she knew, and her heart had simply craved and
yearned over them without the least hope of possession. And now, they were
hers, but the tresses that should have adorned the coveted adornments were
gone.
But she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up
with dim eyes and a smile and say: “My hair grows so fast, Jim!”
And then Della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, “Oh, oh!”
Jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. She held it out to him eagerly
upon her open palm. The dull precious metal seemed to flash with a reflection
of her bright and ardent spirit.
“Isn’t it a dandy, Jim? I hunted all over town to find it. You’ll have to look
at the time a hundred times a day now. Give me your watch. I want to see how
it looks on it.”
Instead of obeying, Jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hands
under the back of his head and smiled.
“Dell,” said he, “let’s put our Christmas presents away and keep ’em a
while. They’re too nice to use just at present. I sold the watch to get the money
to buy your combs. And now suppose you put the chops on.”
The magi, as you know, were wise men—wonderfully wise men—who
brought gifts to the Babe in the manger. They invented the art of giving
Christmas presents. Being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones, possibly
bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. And here I have
lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat
who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their
house. But in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who
give gifts these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as
they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.
Tom Squires came into the drug store to buy a toothbrush, a can of talcum,
a gargle, Castile soap, Epsom salts and a box of cigars. Having lived alone for
many years, he was methodical, and while waiting to be served he held the list
in his hand. It was Christmas week and Minneapolis was under two feet of
exhilarating, constantly refreshed snow; with his cane Tom knocked two clean
crusts of it from his overshoes. Then, looking up, he saw the blonde girl.
She was a rare blonde, even in that Promised Land of Scandinavians,
where pretty blondes are not rare. There was warm color in her cheeks, lips
and pink little hands that folded powders into papers; her hair, in long braids
twisted about her head, was shining and alive. She seemed to Tom suddenly
the cleanest person he knew of, and he caught his breath as he stepped forward
and looked into her gray eyes.
"A can of talcum."
"What kind?"
"Any kind… . That's fine."
She looked back at him apparently without self-consciousness, and, as the
list melted away, his heart raced with it wildly.
"I am not old," he wanted to say. "At fifty I'm younger than most men of
forty. Don't I interest you at all?"
But she only said "What kind of gargle?"
And he answered, "What can you recommend? … That's fine."
Almost painfully he took his eyes from her, went out and got into his
coupé.
"If that young idiot only knew what an old imbecile like me could do for
her," he thought humorously—"what worlds I could open out to her!"
As he drove away into the winter twilight he followed this train of thought
to a totally unprecedented conclusion. Perhaps the time of day was the
responsible stimulant, for the shop windows glowing into the cold, the tinkling
bells of a delivery sleigh, the white gloss left by shovels on the sidewalks, the
enormous distance of the stars, brought back the feel of other nights thirty
years ago. For an instant the girls he had known then slipped like phantoms
out of their dull matronly selves of today and fluttered past him with frosty,
seductive laughter, until a pleasant shiver crawled up his spine.
"Youth! Youth! Youth!" he apostrophized with conscious lack of
originality, and, as a somewhat ruthless and domineering man of no morals
whatsoever, he considered going back to the drug store to seek the blonde
girl's address. It was not his sort of thing, so the half-formed intention passed;
the idea remained.
"Youth, by heaven—youth!" he repeated under his breath. "I want it near
me, all around me, just once more before I'm too old to care."
He was tall, lean and handsome, with the ruddy, bronzed face of a
sportsman and a just faintly graying mustache. Once he had been among the
city's best beaus, organizer of cotillions and charity balls, popular with men
and women, and with several generations of them. After the war he had
suddenly felt poor, gone into business, and in ten years accumulated nearly a
million dollars. Tom Squires was not introspective, but he perceived now that
the wheel of his life had revolved again, bringing up forgotten, yet familiar,
dreams and yearnings. Entering his house, he turned suddenly to a pile of
disregarded invitations to see whether or not he had been bidden to a dance
tonight.
Throughout his dinner, which he ate alone at the Downtown Club, his eyes
were half closed and on his face was a faint smile. He was practicing so that
he would be able to laugh at himself painlessly, if necessary.
"I don't even know what they talk about," he admitted. "They pet—
prominent broker goes to petting party with débutante. What is a petting
party? Do they serve refreshments? Will I have to learn to play a saxophone?"
These matters, lately as remote as China in a news reel, came alive to him.
They were serious questions. At ten o'clock he walked up the steps of the
College Club to a private dance with the same sense of entering a new world
as when he had gone into a training camp back in '17. He spoke to a hostess of
his generation and to her daughter, overwhelmingly of another, and sat down
in a corner to acclimate himself.
He was not alone long. A silly young man named Leland Jaques, who lived
across the street from Tom, remarked him kindly and came over to brighten
his life. He was such an exceedingly fatuous young man that, for a moment,
Tom was annoyed, but he perceived craftily that he might be of service.
"Hello, Mr. Squires. How are you, sir?"
"Fine, thanks, Leland. Quite a dance."
As one man of the world with another, Mr. Jaques sat, or lay, down on the
couch and lit—or so it seemed to Tom—three or four cigarettes at once.
"You should of been here last night, Mr. Squires. Oh, boy, that was a party
and a half! The Caulkins. Hap-past five!"
"Who's that girl who changes partners every minute?" Tom asked… . "No,
the one in white passing the door."
"That's Annie Lorry."
"Arthur Lorry's daughter?"
"Yes."
"She seems popular."
"About the most popular girl in town—anyway, at a dance."
"Not popular except at dances?"
"Oh, sure, but she hangs around with Randy Cambell all the time."
"What Cambell?"
"D. B."
There were new names in town in the last decade.
"It's a boy-and-girl affair." Pleased with this phrase, Jaques tried to repeat
it: "One of those boy-and-girls affair—boys-and-girl affairs—" He gave it up
and lit several more cigarettes, crushing out the first series on Tom's lap.
"Does she drink?"
"Not especially. At least I never saw her passed out… . That's Randy
Cambell just cut in on her now."
They were a nice couple. Her beauty sparkled bright against his strong, tall
form, and they floated hoveringly, delicately, like two people in a nice,
amusing dream. They came near and Tom admired the faint dust of powder
over her freshness, the guarded sweetness of her smile, the fragility of her
body calculated by Nature to a millimeter to suggest a bud, yet guarantee a
flower. Her innocent, passionate eyes were brown, perhaps; but almost violet
in the silver light.
"Is she out this year?"
"Who?"
"Miss Lorry."
"Yes."
Although the girl's loveliness interested Tom, he was unable to picture
himself as one of the attentive, grateful queue that pursued her around the
room. Better meet her when the holidays were over and most of these young
men were back in college "where they belonged." Tom Squires was old
enough to wait.
He waited a fortnight while the city sank into the endless northern
midwinter, where gray skies were friendlier than metallic blue skies, and dusk,
whose lights were a reassuring glimpse into the continuity of human cheer,
was warmer than the afternoons of bloodless sunshine. The coat of snow lost
its press and became soiled and shabby, and ruts froze in the street; some of
the big houses on Crest Avenue began to close as their occupants went South.
In those cold days Tom asked Annie and her parents to go as his guests to the
last Bachelors' Ball.
The Lorrys were an old family in Minneapolis, grown a little harassed and
poor since the war. Mrs. Lorry, a contemporary of Tom's, was not surprised
that he should send mother and daughter orchids and dine them luxuriously in
his apartment on fresh caviar, quail and champagne. Annie saw him only
dimly—he lacked vividness, as the old do for the young—but she perceived
his interest in her and performed for him the traditional ritual of young beauty
—smiles, polite, wide-eyed attention, a profile held obligingly in this light or
in that. At the ball he danced with her twice, and, though she was teased about
it, she was flattered that such a man of the world—he had become that instead
of a mere old man—had singled her out. She accepted his invitation to the
symphony the following week, with the idea that it would be uncouth to
refuse.
There were several "nice invitations" like that. Sitting beside him, she
dozed in the warm shadow of Brahms and thought of Randy Cambell and
other romantic nebulosities who might appear tomorrow. Feeling casually
mellow one afternoon, she deliberately provoked Tom to kiss her on the way
home, but she wanted to laugh when he took her hands and told her fervently
he was falling in love.
"But how could you?" she protested. "Really, you musn't say such crazy
things. I won't go out with you any more, and then you'll be sorry."
A few days later her mother spoke to her as Tom waited outside in his car:
"Who's that, Annie?"
"Mr. Squires."
"Shut the door a minute. You're seeing him quite a bit."
"Why not?"
"Well, dear, he's fifty years old."
"But, mother, there's hardly anybody else in town."
"But you musn't get any silly ideas about him."
"Don't worry. Actually, he bores me to extinction most of the time." She
came to a sudden decision: "I'm not going to see him any more. I just couldn't
get out of going with him this afternoon."
And that night, as she stood by her door in the circle of Randy Cambell's
arm, Tom and his single kiss had no existence for her.
"Oh, I do love you so," Randy whispered. "Kiss me once more."
Their cool cheeks and warm lips met in the crisp darkness, and, watching
the icy moon over his shoulder, Annie knew that she was his surely and,
pulling his face down, kissed him again, trembling with emotion.
"When'll you marry me then?" he whispered.
"When can you—we afford it?"
"Couldn't you announce our engagement? If you knew the misery of
having you out with somebody else and then making love to you."
"Oh, Randy, you ask so much."
"It's so awful to say good night. Can't I come in for a minute?"
"Yes."
Sitting close together in a trance before the flickering, lessening fire, they
were oblivious that their common fate was being coolly weighed by a man of
fifty who lay in a hot bath some blocks away.
Tom Squires had guessed from Annie's extremely kind and detached
manner of the afternoon that he had failed to interest her. He had promised
himself that in such an eventuality he would drop the matter, but now he found
himself in no such humor. He did not want to marry her; he simply wanted to
see her and be with her a little; and up to the moment of her sweetly casual,
half passionate, yet wholly unemotional kiss, giving her up would have been
easy, for he was past the romantic age; but since that kiss the thought of her
made his heart move up a few inches in his chest and beat there steady and
fast.
"But this is the time to get out," he said to himself. "My age; no possible
right to force myself into her life."
He rubbed himself dry, brushed his hair before the mirror, and, as he laid
down the comb, said decisively: "That is that." And after reading for an hour
he turned out the lamp with a snap and repeated aloud: "That is that."
In other words, that was not that at all, and the click of material things did
not finish off Annie Lorry as a business decision might be settled by the tap of
a pencil on the table.
"I'm going to carry this matter a little further," he said to himself about
half-past four; on that acknowledgment he turned over and found sleep.
In the morning she had receded somewhat, but by four o'clock in the
afternoon she was all around him—the phone was for calling her, a woman's
footfalls passing his office were her footfalls, the snow outside the window
was blowing, perhaps, against her rosy face.
"There is always the little plan I thought of last night," he said to himself.
"In ten years I'll be sixty, and then no youth, no beauty for me ever any more."
In a sort of panic he took a sheet of note paper and composed a carefully
phrased letter to Annie's mother, asking permission to pay court to her
daughter. He took it himself into the hall, but before the letter slide he tore it
up and dropped the pieces in a cuspidor.
"I couldn't do such an underhand trick," he told himself, "at my age." But
this self-congratulation was premature, for he rewrote the letter and mailed it
before he left his office that night.
Next day the reply he had counted on arrived—he could have guessed its
very words in advance. It was a curt and indignant refusal.
It ended:
I think it best that you and my daughter meet no more.
Very Sincerely Yours,
MABEL TOLLMAN LORRY.
"And now," Tom thought coolly, "we'll see what the girl says to that." He
wrote a note to Annie. Her mother's letter had surprised him, it said, but
perhaps it was best that they should meet no more, in view of her mother's
attitude.
By return post came Annie's defiant answer to her mother's fiat: "This isn't
the Dark Ages. I'll see you whenever I like." She named a rendezvous for the
following afternoon. Her mother's short-sightedness brought about what he
had failed to achieve directly; for where Annie had been on the point of
dropping him, she was now determined to do nothing of the sort. And the
secrecy engendered by disapproval at home simply contributed the missing
excitement. As February hardened into deep, solemn, interminable winter, she
met him frequently and on a new basis. Sometimes they drove over to St. Paul
to see a picture or to have dinner; sometimes they parked far out on a
boulevard in his coupé, while the bitter sleet glazed the windshield to opacity
and furred his lamps with ermine. Often he brought along something special to
drink—enough to make her gay, but, carefully, never more; for mingled with
his other emotions about her was something paternally concerned.
Laying his cards on the table, he told her that it was her mother who had
unwittingly pushed her toward him, but Annie only laughed at his duplicity.
She was having a better time with him than with anyone else she had ever
known. In place of the selfish exigency of a younger man, he showed her a
never-failing consideration. What if his eyes were tired, his cheeks a little
leathery and veined, if his will was masculine and strong. Moreover, his
experience was a window looking out upon a wider, richer world; and with
Randy Cambell next day she would feel less taken care of, less valued, less
rare.
It was Tom now who was vaguely discontented. He had what he wanted—
her youth at his side—and he felt that anything further would be a mistake.
His liberty was precious to him and he could offer her only a dozen years
before he would be old, but she had become something precious to him and he
perceived that drifting wasn't fair. Then one day late in February the matter
was decided out of hand.
They had ridden home from St. Paul and dropped into the College Club for
tea, breaking together through the drifts that masked the walk and rimmed the
door. It was a revolving door; a young man came around in it, and stepping
into his space, they smelt onions and whisky. The door revolved again after
them, and he was back within, facing them. It was Randy Cambell; his face
was flushed, his eyes dull and hard.
"Hello, beautiful," he said, approaching Annie.
"Don't come so close," she protested lightly. "You smell of onions."
"You're particular all of a sudden."
"Always. I'm always particular." Annie made a slight movement back
toward Tom.
"Not always," said Randy unpleasantly. Then, with increased emphasis and
a fractional glance at Tom: "Not always." With his remark he seemed to join
the hostile world outside. "And I'll just give you a tip," he continued: "Your
mother's inside."
The jealous ill-temper of another generation reached Tom only faintly, like
the protest of a child, but at this impertinent warning he bristled with
annoyance.
"Come on, Annie," he said brusquely. "We'll go in."
With her glance uneasily averted from Randy, Annie followed Tom into
the big room.
It was sparsely populated; three middle-aged women sat near the fire.
Momentarily Annie drew back, then she walked toward them.
"Hello, mother … Mrs. Trumble … Aunt Caroline."
The two latter responded; Mrs. Trumble even nodded faintly at Tom. But
Annie's mother got to her feet without a word, her eyes frozen, her mouth
drawn. For a moment she stood staring at her daughter; then she turned
abruptly and left the room.
Tom and Annie found a table across the room.
"Wasn't she terrible?" said Annie, breathing aloud. He didn't answer.
"For three days she hasn't spoken to me." Suddenly she broke out: "Oh,
people can be so small! I was going to sing the leading part in the Junior
League show, and yesterday Cousin Mary Betts, the president, came to me and
said I couldn't."
"Why not?"
"Because a representative Junior League girl mustn't defy her mother. As if
I were a naughty child!"
Tom stared on at a row of cups on the mantelpiece—two or three of them
bore his name. "Perhaps she was right," he said suddenly. "When I begin to do
harm to you it's time to stop."
"What do you mean?"
At her shocked voice his heart poured a warm liquid forth into his body,
but he answered quietly: "You remember I told you I was going South? Well,
I'm going tomorrow."
There was an argument, but he had made up his mind. At the station next
evening she wept and clung to him.
"Thank you for the happiest month I've had in years," he said.
"But you'll come back, Tom."
"I'll be two months in Mexico; then I'm going East for a few weeks."
He tried to sound fortunate, but the frozen city he was leaving seemed to
be in blossom. Her frozen breath was a flower on the air, and his heart sank as
he realized that some young man was waiting outside to take her home in a car
hung with blooms.
"Good-by, Annie. Good-by, sweet!"
Two days later he spent the morning in Houston with Hal Meigs, a
classmate at Yale.
"You're in luck for such an old fella," said Meigs at luncheon, "because I'm
going to introduce you to the cutest little traveling companion you ever saw,
who's going all the way to Mexico City."
The lady in question was frankly pleased to learn at the station that she was
not returning alone. She and Tom dined together on the train and later played
rummy for an hour; but when, at ten o'clock, standing in the door of the
stateroom, she turned back to him suddenly with a certain look, frank and
unmistakable, and stood there holding that look for a long moment, Tom
Squires was suddenly in the grip of an emotion that was not the one in
question. He wanted desperately to see Annie, call her for a second on the
phone, and then fall asleep, knowing she was young and pure as a star, and
safe in bed.
"Good night," he said, trying to keep any repulsion out of his voice.
"Oh! Good night."
Arriving in El Paso next day, he drove over the border to Juarez. It was
bright and hot, and after leaving his bags at the station he went into a bar for
an iced drink; as he sipped it a girl's voice addressed him thickly from the
table behind:
"You'n American?"
He had noticed her slumped forward on her elbows as he came in; now,
turning, he faced a young girl of about seventeen, obviously drunk, yet with
gentility in her unsteady, sprawling voice. The American bartender leaned
confidentially forward.
"I don't know what to do about her," he said. "She come in about three
o'clock with two young fellows—one of them her sweetie. They had a fight
and the men went off, and this one's been here ever since."
A spasm of distaste passed over Tom—the rules of his generation were
outraged and defied. That an American girl should be drunk and deserted in a
tough foreign town—that such things happened, might happen to Annie. He
looked at his watch, hesitated.
"Has she got a bill?" he asked.
"She owes for five gins. But suppose her boy friends come back?"
"Tell them she's at the Roosevelt Hotel in El Paso."
Approaching, he put his hand on her shoulder. She looked up.
"You look like Santa Claus," she said vaguely. "You couldn't possibly be
Santa Claus, could you?"
"I'm going to take you to El Paso."
"Well," she considered, "you look perfectly safe to me."
She was so young—a drenched little rose. He could have wept for her
wretched unconsciousness of the old facts, the old penalties of life. Jousting at
nothing in an empty tilt yard with a shaking spear. The taxi moved too slowly
through the suddenly poisonous night.
Having explained things to a reluctant night clerk, he went out and found a
telegraph office.
"Have given up Mexican trip," he wired. "Leaving here tonight. Please
meet train in the St. Paul station at three o'clock and ride with me to
Minneapolis, as I can't spare you for another minute. All my love."
He could at least keep an eye on her, advise her, see what she did with her
life. That silly mother of hers!
On the train, as the baked tropical lands and green fields fell away and the
North swept near again with patches of snow, then fields of it, fierce winds in
the vestibule and bleak, hibernating farms, he paced the corridors with
intolerable restlessness. When they drew into the St. Paul station he swung
himself off like a young man and searched the platform eagerly, but his eyes
failed to find her. He had counted on those few minutes between the cities;
they had become a symbol of her fidelity to their friendship, and as the train
started again he searched it desperately from smoker to observation car. But he
could not find her, and now he knew that he was mad for her; at the thought
that she had taken his advice and plunged into affairs with other men, he grew
weak with fear.
Drawing into Minneapolis, his hands fumbled so that he must call the
porter to fasten his baggage. Then there was an interminable wait in the
corridor while the baggage was taken off and he was pressed up against a girl
in a squirrel-trimmed coat.
"Tom!"
"Well, I'll be—"
Her arms went up around his neck. "But, Tom," she cried, "I've been right
here in this car since St. Paul!"
His cane fell in the corridor, he drew her very tenderly close and their lips
met like starved hearts.
The new intimacy of their definite engagement brought Tom a feeling of
young happiness. He awoke on winter mornings with the sense of undeserved
joy hovering in the room; meeting young men, he found himself matching the
vigor of his mind and body against theirs. Suddenly his life had a purpose and
a background; he felt rounded and complete. On gray March afternoons when
she wandered familiarly in his apartment the warm sureties of his youth
flooded back—ecstasy and poignancy, the mortal and the eternal posed in their
immemorially tragic juxtaposition and, a little astounded, he found himself
relishing the very terminology of young romance. But he was more thoughtful
than a younger lover; and to Annie he seemed to "know everything," to stand
holding open the gates for her passage into the truly golden world.
"We'll go to Europe first," he said.
"Oh, we'll go there a lot, won't we? Let's spend our winters in Italy and the
spring in Paris."
"But, little Annie, there's business."
"Well, we'll stay away as much as we can anyhow. I hate Minneapolis."
"Oh, no." He was a little shocked. "Minneapolis is all right."
"When you're here it's all right."
Mrs. Lorry yielded at length to the inevitable. With ill grace she
acknowledged the engagement, asking only that the marriage should not take
place until fall.
"Such a long time," Annie sighed.
"After all, I'm your mother. It's so little to ask."
It was a long winter, even in a land of long winters. March was full of
billowy drifts, and when it seemed at last as though the cold must be defeated,
there was a series of blizzards, desperate as last stands. The people waited;
their first energy to resist was spent, and man, like weather, simply hung on.
There was less to do now and the general restlessness was expressed by
surliness in daily contacts. Then, early in April, with a long sigh the ice
cracked, the snow ran into the ground and the green, eager spring broke up
through.
One day, riding along a slushy road in a fresh, damp breeze with a little
starved, smothered grass in it, Annie began to cry. Sometimes she cried for
nothing, but this time Tom suddenly stopped the car and put his arm around
her.
"Why do you cry like that? Are you unhappy?"
"Oh, no, no!" she protested.
"But you cried yesterday the same way. And you wouldn't tell me why.
You must always tell me."
"Nothing, except the spring. It smells so good, and it always has so many
sad thoughts and memories in it."
"It's our spring, my sweetheart," he said. "Annie, don't let's wait. Let's be
married in June."